System-of-systems effectiveness evaluation of UAV swarm: A data-driven perspective 3
calculation of effectiveness based on these indicators. For the ing techniques to model the non-linear relationships between
effectiveness calculation, the experience-driven and mathemat- input indicators and output effectiveness, enabling the perfor-
ical analysis-driven methods are first applied. The experience- mance evaluation by learning directly from historical data.
driven method, such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process These methods establish a complex link between SoS indica-
(AHP),13 relies on expert judgment or empirical data to assign tors and effectiveness, facilitating accurate predictions and
weights to indicators in SEE. AHP is often combined with assessments.
techniques like fuzzy theory14 and TOPSIS15 to better repre- Due to their ability to rapidly and precisely assess system
sent expert knowledge. Li et al.16 combined AHP with the performance, Data-driven SEE methods have garnered sub-
entropy weight method to form a multi-index evaluation stantial research interest. Traditional machine learning
method for evaluating the coverage effectiveness of a remote approaches, such as the BP Neural Network (BPNN),7 Rele-
sensing satellite. Furthermore, He et al.17 adopted a multidi- vance Vector Machine (RVM),28 and Support Vector Machine
mensional normal cloud model to determine SoS indicators’ (SVM),29 have been applied to successfully evaluate systems
weights and thus evaluated the Communication. However, with simpler structures. These techniques rely on straightfor-
the application of these effectiveness evaluation methods is ward models to establish a mapping relationship between
mainly based on expert experience, thereby always tending to SoS indicators and corresponding effectiveness. Yu et al.30
be highly subjective and resulting in evaluation outcomes that developed some basic neural networks to evaluate the effec-
are hard to trust. tiveness of UAVS. To enhance the performance of the Data-
Mathematical analysis-driven SEE methods construct mod- driven model, they adopt feedback-based attribute extraction
els to quantify the relationships between SoS indicators and and anti-causality detection to select more valuable indicators
effectiveness. These models, like ADC18 and the entropy and training data. Zhao et al.31 adopted the Deep Belief Net-
weight method,19 provide a precise way to compute system work (DBN) to evaluate the effectiveness of the anti-missile
performance by analyzing how changes in indicators affect equipment system. In this Data-driven model, the parameter
outcomes. Owing to the complexity and uncertainty of swarm of the DBN is optimized by the grey wolf optimization algo-
systems, traditional mathematical analysis often simplifies the rithm. Han et al.7 combined data from a simulation and
system, which causes a reduction in the accuracy and reliability AHP methods to train a BPNN for effectiveness evaluation.
of the results. In a related research area, resilience evaluation Zhao et al.29 employed SVM to assess the effectiveness of dif-
of UAVS, complex network modeling approaches are widely ferent disposition strategies. However, as system complexity
applied, where the swarm is represented as a graph, and indi- grows and the volume of simulation and real-world data
cators such as connectivity, robustness, and efficiency are increases, traditional small-data models and machine learning
mathematically analyzed.20 In terms of effectiveness, it can techniques are becoming less effective. A promising solution to
be represented in a complex network. Hu et al.21 calculated this challenge is introducing deep learning techniques, which
the communication effectiveness based on the path lengths of have the potential to reconstruct simulation processes and
networks. enhance effectiveness evaluation.32 Deep Neural Networks
In contrast, simulation-driven SEE methods leverage simu- (DNN),33 as foundational deep learning models, have already
lation models to evaluate SoS effectiveness. These methods been applied to SEE problems. Additionally, autoencoders,34
simulate the behavior of the system under specific conditions known for their robust dimensionality reduction capabilities,
defined by the SoS indicators. By executing these simulations, can effectively represent the information contained in high-
effectiveness can be determined by the results of the system’s dimensional indicators with fewer dimensions, making them
performance in a virtual environment.22 Jia et al.8 proposed a valuable tool for SEE applications. Qi et al.10 were among
an effectiveness evaluation method for UAVS systems through the first to integrate sparse representations into autoencoders,
the established simulation system based on the system dynam- allowing for the evaluation process and enabling effective
ics model. Furthermore, Agent-Based Modeling (ABM)23 is assessment of high-dimensional effectiveness.
frequently employed as a simulation-driven evaluation tech- Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), widely regarded as
nique, especially for UAVS. Quan et al.24 and Jia et al.25 one of the most powerful deep learning methods, is particu-
employed ABM to establish the simulation system of the larly effective in extracting complex, deep features across
UAVS in tracking tasks and thus applied it in evaluating multi-dimensional data. Through convolutional structures,
and further optimizing its effectiveness. Furthermore, Kong CNN can explore and capture the relationships between differ-
et al.26 and Bai et al.27 respectively established multi-agent sim- ent SoS indicators. Li et al.35 employed 1D-CNN to process
ulation systems to evaluate the effectiveness and resilience of one-dimensional SoS indicators in SEE problems. Zhao et al.36
UAVS under resource supplementation and communication applied a CNN with Bayesian optimization to learn the rela-
limits. Simulation-driven evaluation methods yield results with tion between the 1D indicators and the effectiveness of anti-
high credibility; however, rapid assessment of equipment sys- missile equipment based on the simulation data. Moreover,
tems is hindered by high modeling costs and lengthy simula- by transforming SoS indicators into two or more dimensions,
tion modeling and execution times. CNN can more effectively uncover implicit relationships
between indicators, improving the speed and accuracy of the
2.2. Data-driven SEE evaluation process. Besides CNN, advanced deep learning
models such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which can
express the complex relation of complex point and edges,37
The large volumes of historical data generated during large-
scale simulations and actual task executions provide valuable have also shown success in swarm coordination and communi-
opportunities to uncover complex relationships between sys-
cation optimization,38,39 although their direct application to
tem entities. Data-driven SEE methods utilize machine learn-
SoS effectiveness evaluation remains an open and under-