14 W. QUAN et al.
provides a more suitable risk-sensitive objective for effective- ples. The results for various active learning strategies are
ness estimation. shown in Table 6.
Based on the experiments, it is evident that the ResNet- Table 6 presents both the mean and standard deviation of
Skew algorithm can effectively evaluate the SoS effectiveness RMSE and MAE obtained from multiple independent experi-
of UAVS, outperforming other commonly used algorithms ments to assess the performance stability of each active learn-
in terms of both RMSE and MAE indicators. The model’s ing strategy. In Table 6, the iRDM-RGS active learning
architecture enhances its metric performance and satisfies the strategy outperforms all other methods in both RMSE and
actual application demand of the Data-driven SEE model. MAE, as well as showing superior stability. Compared to Ran-
dom Sampling (RS), every active learning algorithm demon-
6.3. Active learning strategy performance strates significant improvements in the quality of initial
sample selection, highlighting the impact of active learning
on model performance. The performance of iRDM and GSx
This section employs the proposed active learning method
is quite similar, though GSx exhibits greater stability. This
iRDM-RGS to select high-value initial samples, validating
could be attributed to iRDM’s tendency to select samples with
the enhancement of active learning strategies on model
decreasing representativeness and stability as the number of
training.
clusters grows. In contrast, iRDM-RGS combines clustering-
6.3.1. Experimental settings and metrics based selection with greedy sampling to balance representa-
tiveness and diversity, achieving superior performance, partic-
To simulate an active learning scenario, we first annotate 1000
ularly during large-scale sample selection.
samples from the previously collected 10 000 unlabeled sam-
To comprehensively evaluate the active learning methods,
ples as the test set. The remaining 9000 samples are then sub-
we would compare their performance across different sample
jected to active learning methods, selecting between 200 and
selection sizes by selecting between 200 and 1000 samples (ev-
1000 samples for simulation-based annotation, which will
ery 200 samples) from 9000 unsupervised samples. This more
serve as the training set for the model.
extensive test evaluates how each method performs across dif-
For the active learning model, the following experimental
ferent conditions and sample quantities, ensuring that the
parameters are set after extensive testing: the iteration count
robustness of the methods is understood in a broader context.
G is set to 10, the RGS parameter c is set to 20, and the sam-
max The results of these tests are shown in Table 7 and Fig. 9,
ple collection size N through iRDM is set to 200. The RMSE
which illustrate RMSE performance and statistical results of
and MAE metrics are used to assess the discrepancies between
each method at various scales.
the model’s predicted and actual values. Euclidean distance is
In Table 7 and Fig. 9, the iRDM-RGS method consistently
chosen to calculate the sample values as it effectively measures
outperforms the other active learning methods and random
spatial relationships between samples, especially for evenly dis-
sampling across all sample sizes. The low standard deviation
tributed data. After standardization, it accurately reflects sim-
of iRDM-RGS also shows its strong stability. As the number
ilarities between samples without being influenced by feature
of selected samples increases from 200 to 1000, the iRDM-
scale differences.
RGS method maintains superior performance on each index.
To comparatively validate the iRDM-RGS method, three
All active learning methods perform better than Random Sam-
recent active learning regression algorithms and random sam-
pling (RS). When only 200 samples are annotated, the iRDM-
pling method are selected for comparative analysis: (A) GSx,49
RGS method shows similar performance to other clustering-
Greedy sampling on the Inputs; (B) iRDM,47 iterative
based methods, such as iRDM and RD, which perform well
representativeness-diversity maximization; (C) RD,50 a
due to their high representativeness and diversity at smaller
method synthesized representativeness and diversity; (D) RS,
sample sizes. However, as the sample size increases, the cluster-
a baseline method by randomly sampling. By integrating the
ing methods begin to lose their optimal properties, and the
aforementioned four methods with the Data-driven frame-
GSx method, which employs greedy selection, gradually sur-
work, we can verify the effect of these methods.
passes them by selecting more diverse samples. The RD algo-
rithm maintains diversity across multiple iterations, although
6.3.2. Model evaluation and algorithm comparison
it requires more computational time.
We first evaluate the performance of the active learning algo- The iRDM-RGS method combines the strengths of both
rithm by selecting 1000 samples from the 9000 unlabeled sam- iRDM and greedy-based methods. Initially, iRDM selects a
Table 6 Statistical results for active learning strategies.
Strategy RMSE MAE
Mean Std (10 3) Mean Std (10 3)
iRDM-RGS 0.073 2.02 0.055 1.31
GSx 0.077(+) 4.10 0.059(+) 3.85
iRDM 0.078(+) 4.09 0.059(+) 4.10
RD 0.079(+) 3.25 0.060(+) 3.90
RS 0.081(+) 2.21 0.061(+) 2.00