System-of-systems effectiveness evaluation of UAV swarm: A data-driven perspective 7
Fig. 3 Comparison between loop stacking and direct stacking.
Table 2 Structure of ResNet-Skew.
Block Structure Block Structure
Block 1 3 3 64 1 Block 2 3 3 64
2
3 3 64
Block 3 3 3 128 Block 4 3 3 256
2 2
3 3 128 3 3 256
Block 5 Average pooling Block 6 64 64
which is crucial for capturing the complex relationships among 4.3. Skewed loss function
SoS indicators. The detailed structure of the proposed ResNet-
Skew model is shown in Table 2.
The loss function is essential for assessing the accuracy of a
The model consists of 13 convolutional layers, each with
model’s predictions, quantifying the discrepancy between the
3 3 kernels, that process the SoS indicator features. Residual model’s predicted value f x and the true effectiveness value
i
structures are incorporated into the network, allowing shallow
y . A smaller loss value indicates better model robustness.
features to skip two convolution layers and reach deeper layers F i or this task, the Huber loss function44 is used as the founda-
in blocks 2, 3, and 4, effectively maintaining robust training
tion due to its combination of the advantages of both the
performance even as the network depth increases.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error
In terms of the residual process, denote the original data as
(MSE) loss functions. The Huber loss applies the MAE for
X, and the data processed by the first and the second convolu-
large errors, using a constant gradient for training, while it
tion layer of blocks 2 to 4 as Z and Y, which can be expressed
switches to the MSE for small errors, allowing for a smaller
as
gradient and ensuring that the loss decreases as the error
diminishes. Let x be a sample with a true label y and predicted
i i
Z ReLU BN W 1 X 3 value f x i . The corresponding Huber loss is defined as
Y ReLU BN W Z W X
2 3 2d f x y d2 f x y d
L i i i i 5
where ReLU is the rectified linear unit and BN denotes batch Huber f x y 2 f x y 6 d
normalization and W W denote the kernel of convolution i i i i
1 2
layer. W is a linear transformation matrix. represent the where d is the threshold parameter. When the bias between
3
convolution process. After two convolution layers, the original f x and y smaller than or equal to d, the Huber loss applies
i i
feature X would be directly added to the processed data as Y. MSE (squared error), and switches to MAE (absolute error)
The goal of the SEE model is to predict the effectiveness when the error exceeds d. This design allows the loss to be
value. Therefore, the feature data processed by the convolution quadratic near zero to ensure smooth gradients, and linear
and residual structures needs to be transformed into a one- for large errors.
dimensional effectiveness value. After data conversion by aver- However, in practical scenarios, particularly when evaluat-
age pooling, two Fully Connected (FC) layers are used to ing the effectiveness of swarm systems, discrepancies where the
regress the SoS effectiveness. The output data x is trans- model’s predicted effectiveness exceeds the actual effectiveness
o
formed into a 0–1 effectiveness value E using the Sigmoid can result in an overestimation of the system’s capabilities. If
s
function as this overestimation (predicted effectiveness exceeding actual
performance) leads to deployment, the system may fail during
1
E 4 execution, as its actual performance will not meet expectations.
s 1 e xo
Such misalignments can have severe consequences, particularly