10 W. QUAN et al.
After clustering iteration yields the sample set O , this algo-
c
rithm tallies the remaining samples into R and chooses M N
samples from this set. This approach is conceptually similar to
a subset selection problem, which can be tackled using models
and solution strategies from the latter. According to the prin-
ciple of subset selection, we aim to include samples that are
more distant from the existing set, thus broadening the sample
space. However, solving this problem with exact optimization
methods is computationally expensive, particularly for large-
Fig. 6 Selection rules of iRDM-RGS. scale datasets. To address this, the algorithm employs a greedy
approach to iteratively select samples.
lines. Additionally, the distance from D to B measures the
For each sample point x in R, the distance to the currently
diversity D x D , indicating the minimal distance to other clus- selected set O is computed, i with the minimum distance being
ter centers. The combined evaluation of these two metrics c
used as the selection criterion. The minimum distance is calcu-
determines whether point D should replace the old selected
lated as
sample point C.
To ensure the stability of the sample updates, the aforemen- C x i minx j O c D x i x j 10
tioned method is iterated G times. The updated sample set
max A greater minimum distance indicates that the sample is
O O O O is obtained. Based on this dataset, a
c c1 c2 cN more distant from the distribution space of O , thus enhancing
random greedy strategy based on diversity criteria would be c
diversity. Normally, a greedy optimization would select the
further employed to select the remaining samples.
sample with the maximum C x to add to the set O . This
i c
selection criterion can be represented as
5.3. Random greedy sampling strategy
u argmaxx
i
RC x
i
11
After applying the iRDM method, the sample set O c consists However, greedy methods are highly sensitive to the initial
of N selected samples, leaving M N samples unselected. To sample selection, and inappropriate initial samples can lead the
further enhance the diversity of the selected samples and algorithm to local optima. To mitigate this, a randomized
ensure a broad representation of the sample space, we intro- greedy approach is introduced. Rather than deterministically
duce the Random Greedy Sampling (RGS) strategy. This choosing the sample with the maximum distance, a probability
strategy combines greedy selection with randomness, as is assigned to each sample based on its distance. This proba-
described in Algorithm 2. iRDM primarily focuses on selecting bilistic approach reduces the likelihood of the algorithm
a small number of highly representative samples, and the RGS becoming stuck in local optima. The probability is calculated
strategy aims to enhance the diversity of the sample set by as
selecting additional samples that are distant from those already
M N
chosen, thereby ensuring broader coverage of the sample p C x c C x c 12
space. This shift in focus allows RGS to complement iRDM i i j
j 1
by filling the gaps left by the representativeness-driven initial
where c is a greediness control parameter. When c 0, all sam-
selection, thus optimizing the overall sampling process.
ples have an equal probability of being selected, while increas-
Algorithm 2. Random greedy sampling strategy. ing c skews the probability towards samples with larger
distances. As c approaches infinity, the model closely approx-
Input: Unlabeled sample sets: O O O O , Sample
1 2 K imates pure greedy selection.
selected by iRDM: O O O O , Budget of sample
c c1 c2 cN Using this probabilistic model, the roulette wheel method is
selection in RGS: M N.
Output: Samples selected by RGS: X x x x . applied to select samples based on their assigned probabilities,
r N 1 N 2 M which are then added to O . This process continues until the
1. Count all the remaining unlabeled sample set: c
R O O R R R . sample set reaches the budget size M.
c 1 2 K N
2. j 0. The selection rule of RGS is illustrated in Fig. 6(b). Sup-
3. while j M N do pose A, B, and C represent samples selected by iRDM. During
4. for R i in R do the greedy selection process, each candidate point in the sam-
5. Calculate the minimum sample distance from R i to O c by ple space is evaluated based on its minimal distance to the
Eq. (10). selected points, which is converted into a probability. For
6. end for
example, points E, F, G, and H are evaluated, and their prob-
7. Calculate the selection probability of samples by Eq. (12).
abilities P , P , P , and P are computed accordingly. The
8. Use the roulette wheel method to select a sample R from R to E F G H
enter the set O based on the probability. i next sample is selected based on these probabilities.
c
9. Remove R from set R. Selecting samples using the iRDM-RGS strategy, the algo-
i
10. j j 1. rithm then computes the effectiveness values and ultimately
11. end while generates a labeled dataset for deep learning model training.
12. Set X O . The combination of iRDM’s focus on representativeness and
r c
13. return Sample selected by RGS: X r x N 1 x N 2 x M . RGS’s emphasis on diversity ensures efficient sample selection,