16 W. QUAN et al.
6.4. Utility analysis of Data-driven SEE framework
Table 8 Computational time for active learning strategies.
Strategy Sampling time (s) Labeling time (h)
To further validate the practical utility of the Data-driven SEE
iRDM-RGS 67 Framework, this section will employ the framework on some
GSx <1 actual instances of the established mission of UAVS.
iRDM 195 >10
RD 8500
6.4.1. Data-driven SEE for evaluation and analysis
RS <1
To demonstrate the application of the Data-driven SEE
model, we evaluate the effectiveness of four different UAVS
SoS instances. Their SoS indicators and evaluation results
are summarized in Table 10.
The four instances are evaluated using the Data-driven SEE
framework. The predicted effectiveness is closely aligned with
6.3.3. Model structure validation and analysis
the actual simulation results, confirming the model’s predictive
This section presents ablation studies to validate and analyze accuracy. By including the target vehicle’s SoS indicators, the
the efficacy of the two primary modules in the proposed algo- framework allows for evaluation across multiple task types,
rithm: iRDM and RGS. These modules are compared as stan-
enhancing its application versatility.
dalone active learning methods against the combined iRDM- When comparing the instances, it is evident that higher-
RGS algorithm. Additionally, to fully evaluate the impact of performing UAVS, like the second instance (No. 2), outper-
the randomness introduced by RGS, a comparison is made
form lower-performance systems (No. 1) in the same mission.
with the non-random version of the greedy algorithm, GSx. However, this performance improvement comes with an
The mean and standard deviation results are summarized in increased cost. Comparing No. 2 and No. 3, the UAVS setup
Table 9.
is held constant, while the target vehicles’ quantity and speed
The iRDM-RGS method, by integrating both the iRDM
increase. The resulting drop in effectiveness demonstrates that
and RGS modules, significantly enhances performance com- task context alone can significantly affect system performance.
pared to using either module individually. As seen from the Finally, from No. 3 to No. 4, task difficulty (targets’ parame-
results, the RGS algorithm, which incorporates randomness
ters) remains unchanged, but the quantity and ability of com-
through probability selection, helps the model avoid local munication UAV is increased. Such enhancement facilitates
optima, leading to better performance than the GSx algo- the system’s communication and networking ability, thereby
rithm, which lacks this randomness. However, when RGS
enhancing the effectiveness of UAVS. These controlled com-
is used alone, its performance is still slightly inferior to parisons collectively support that SoS effectiveness is jointly
the iRDM-RGS algorithm due to its limited impact on shaped by both system capability and task-specific contextual
the initial sample selection process. In contrast, the
factors. SoS indicators of UAVS must be tailored to the speci-
iRDM-RGS method combines the strengths of both mod-
fic task requirements.
ules. The iRDM algorithm first selects an optimal set of
initial samples, ensuring a strong foundation for the model.
Then, the RGS module applies random greedy sampling to 6.4.2. Data-driven SEE framework for optimization
these selected samples, enhancing early-stage sample selec- Building upon the insights gained from the previous evaluation
tion and promoting better diversity and representativeness. experiment, the Data-driven SEE model can also be applied to
This synergy of the iRDM and RGS modules results in a optimize the UAVS system for improved effectiveness and
more efficient selection process, maximizing the value of reduced costs. The proposed Data-driven SEE framework
the selected samples and boosting the overall performance not only allows for evaluating the effectiveness of UAVS sys-
of model training. tems but can also be applied to optimize their performance.
The ablation results clearly demonstrate that the iRDM- Optimization typically requires running simulations, which is
RGS approach, by focusing on high-value unsupervised sam- computationally expensive. However, by using the Data-
ples, significantly reduces the number of required simulation driven model to evaluate effectiveness, we can accelerate the
annotations. This reduction in labeling efforts not only lowers optimization of UAVS SoS indicators.
simulation costs but also improves the efficiency of SEE model In this optimization problem, the effectiveness and SoS
training for UAVS. configuration cost of UAVS are set as objectives, with SoS
Table 9 Statistical results for different model structures.
Strategy RMSE MAE
Mean Std (10 3) Mean Std (10 3)
iRDM-RGS 0.073 2.02 0.055 1.31
RGS 0.076(+) 3.03 0.057(+) 3.35
iRDM 0.078(+) 4.09 0.059(+) 4.10
GSx 0.077(+) 4.10 0.059(+) 3.85