System-of-systems effectiveness evaluation of UAV swarm: A data-driven perspective 5
Fig. 1 Collaborative detection and tracking simulation scenario of UAVS.
cators are sampled from the data sampling space and
Table 1 SoS indicators for UAVS typical scenario.
then simulated through the simulation system. The effec-
Type Category SoS indicator tiveness calculated by simulation would be collected and
combined with the indicators to become the dataset for
UAVS Detection UAV Quantity, Maximum speed, Maximum
Communication acceleration, Detection the evaluation module.
UAV (Communication) range (2) Data-driven effectiveness evaluation network. Based on
Target Ground vehicle the simulated dataset, this part establishes and trains a
deep learning neural network for SEE of UAVS. In
response to the difficulty of deep learning methods in
directly matching the indicator structure of swarm sys-
tems with practical application requirements, an evalua-
Besides the task completion rate, the number of disabled tion network based on a residual neural network and a
drones caused by targets’ attack should also be considered in skewed loss function is designed. After fully training
the effectiveness calculation. The disabled degree M can the Data-driven model, the UAVS system with certain
dis
be expressed as the ratio of the number of disabled drones to indicators can be quickly evaluated through this model.
all drones. Combining two factors, the SoS effectiveness E (3) Active learning for sample selection. The Data-driven
s
of UAVS can be calculated by applying a weighting method as evaluation model heavily relies on the simulation data.
However, the collection of datasets requires the
E x M x 1 M 2
s 1 c 2 dis simulation-based labeling of unlabeled indicators’ data,
where x and x are weights of the task completion rate and which would cost a significant amount of time to exe-
1 2
disabled rate. The value of weights is determined based on cute. To reduce the high-cost simulation annotation,
operational requirements from experts, where task completion an active learning strategy is constructed to screen a
rate is prioritized to reflect mission success as the primary small number of high-value unlabeled samples from
objective, and disabled degree is considered to capture the sys- the sampling space. By simulating these limited but
tem’s survivability. Therefore, x and x are set to 0.8 and 0.2. high-value samples, the number of simulations can be
1 2
Utilizing the established SoS indicators and effectiveness reduced while ensuring accuracy.
measurement method, the SoS dataset can be acquired by
the UAVS simulation system to build the Data-driven evalua- Moreover, the proposed framework is versatile and can be
tion network, which will be discussed in the next section. applied to UAVS with different indicators under various sce-
narios, not limited to the mentioned tracking mission. The
3.3. Data-driven SEE framework for UAVS framework is adaptable, enabling its use for different types
of UAVS applications, such as surveillance, search and rescue,
and environmental monitoring, by adjusting the relevant SoS
The proposed Data-driven SEE framework, shown in Fig. 2,
indicators to meet the specific needs of each scenario.
consists of three main parts: UAVS simulation and data pro-
cessing, the Data-driven effectiveness evaluation network,
and active learning for sample selection. 4. Data-driven evaluation network for UAVS
(1) UAVS simulation and data processing. Data is the core 4.1. Framework of proposed SEE method
of the Data-driven SEE method. All the data for train-
ing the evaluation model are derived from the dataset The framework of the proposed Data-driven effectiveness
collected by the UAVS simulation system. In this mod- evaluation network, named ResNet with Skewed Loss
ule, simulation data of UAVS with important SoS indi- (ResNet-Skew), is depicted in Fig. 2. The network model con-