8 W. QUAN et al.
in critical missions, where failure due to underperformance
may lead to catastrophic outcomes. On the contrary, when
the predicted effectiveness is lower than the actual effective-
ness, the system may be overly cautious, but the consequences
are generally less severe. Underestimation typically leads to
inefficiencies or suboptimal performance, without the high-
risk potential associated with overestimating system
capabilities.
In real-world applications, particularly in UAVS tasks, the
cost of failure resulting from overestimation is far more dam-
aging than the inefficiencies caused by underestimation.
Unfortunately, standard prediction models do not account
for these critical differences in how various types of prediction
errors impact system performance. To address this issue, we Fig. 4 Loss curve of skewed Huber loss with effectiveness label
modify the Huber loss function by introducing a skewed loss 0.5.
function. This adjusted function places greater emphasis on
pronounced, as observed in the right-hand side of the loss
cases where the predicted effectiveness exceeds the actual effec-
function. This adjustment mitigates the adverse effects of over-
tiveness, thus reducing the likelihood of deploying systems
estimated predictions on decision-making.
with overly optimistic predictions that could result in task fail-
The skewed loss maintains the robustness of the Huber for-
ure. The skewed loss function is defined as
mulation (i.e., quadratic loss for small errors and linear loss for
ek 2d f x i y i d2 d f x i y i large ones), while adding directional sensitivity through k . This
ek f x y 2 0 f x y 6 d provides a flexible, interpretable, and tunable loss function
L SL e k f x i y i 2 d i f x i y 6 0 6 that aligns optimization objectives with real-world safety and
i i i i robustness needs in UAVS systems. As shown in Section 6.5,
e k 2d f x i y i d2 f x i y i 6 d increasing k leads to a consistent reduction in overestimation
where k represents a penalty adjustment parameter, with a bias, while maintaining comparable RMSE. This demonstrates
the practical effectiveness of the skewed loss in balancing per-
value range of [0,1].
formance accuracy with risk sensitivity. Section 6.5 will discuss
This modified loss function dynamically adjusts its magni-
tude based on the parameters d and ek . The loss function is the effect of skewed loss in detail.
The residual-based evaluation network and the skewed loss
divided into four segments based on the prediction error.
function module together form the ResNet-Skew SEE frame-
When the model’s predicted value exceeds the actual label, a
higher penalty weight ek is applied, as illustrated in the first work of UAVS. This model enables rapid and accurate predic-
tions of SoS effectiveness and adapts to the real-world
two cases of Eq. (6). In contrast, when the predicted value is
demands of UAVS tasks.
lower than the actual value, a smaller penalty weight e k is
used, with the switching behavior of the MSE and MAE loss
functions still governed by d. The latter two cases of Eq. (6) 5. Active learning for sample selection
correspond to this scenario. Notably, when k 0, the expo-
nential weights reduce to 1 and the loss becomes equivalent Training a Data-driven SEE model requires a large amount of
to the standard Huber loss, which treats overestimation and labeled data. However, obtaining effectiveness values for
underestimation symmetrically. UAVS with different indicators via simulations is both time-
The proposed skewed loss is a risk-aware generalization of consuming and costly. Therefore, it is crucial to minimize
Huber loss, where k controls the degree of asymmetry in penal- training costs by selecting high-value samples. Active learning
izing overestimation. This design is motivated by the asymmet- offers a solution by selecting the most informative samples
ric risk in UAVS mission, where overestimation of from an unlabeled dataset for annotation, thus reducing the
effectiveness can result in mission failure, while underestima- overall number of required annotations during training.46 By
tion typically leads to conservative but safer decisions. Tradi- incorporating active learning into the SEE framework, we
tional symmetric losses like MSE or Huber do not capture can effectively reduce sample annotation cost.
this risk profile. The skewed loss is theoretically supported
by cost-sensitive learning and quantile regression,45 which
introduce asymmetry into learning objectives to reflect real-
world decision priorities.
Fig. 4 illustrates the impact of varying the k parameter on
the skewed loss function at an actual effectiveness value of
0.5. The dashed line represents the loss function values using
the original Huber loss, while the other curves show the
skewed loss function with different values of k. On all curves,
the gradient decreases as the error diminishes and stabilizes at
larger errors, allowing for variable gradient strategies based on
the error magnitude. As k increases, the penalty for samples
with predicted values above the actual values becomes more
Fig. 5 Application process of active learning method in SEE.