6 W. QUAN et al.
Fig. 2 Data-driven SEE framework for UAVS.
sists of three components. First, a feature transformation wise to form a structured 2D matrix. Compared to direct
method based on loop stacking is introduced to convert the duplication or stacking, this method increases the effective
SoS indicators of UAVS into a two-dimensional format. Next, receptive field, enabling the CNN to learn richer feature rela-
convolutional and residual structures, along with fully con- tionships without increasing input dimensionality or requiring
nected layers, are employed to extract relevant information explicit spatial encoding. In this SEE problem, the original 12
and calculate the effectiveness value. Additionally, to better SoS features are transformed to 12 12 feature map and then
align Data-driven models with real-world applications, this are processed by convolutional architectures, allowing for the
study designs a skewed loss function to relieve overestimated exploration of feature correlations and uncovering deep inter-
predictions during training. Detailed descriptions of each mod- connections between features.
ule will follow. To clearly illustrate the advantages of the loop stacking
method in processing 2D system indicator features, a compar-
4.2. Residual-based evaluation network ison is conducted between this method and the direct stacking
method in Fig. 3, highlighting the differences in processing
Deep learning methods are highly effective at simulating and
one-dimensional data with five features. Fig. 3(a) shows the
fitting complex systems, but they are typically applied to
illustration that a 3 3 convolution structure is applied to
multi-dimensional data. In SEE, the SoS indicators are one- the indicators processed by different stacking methods.
dimensional, necessitating a mechanism to transform indica-
Fig. 3(b) shows the times of each indicator that this convolu-
tors into a suitable format. Transforming one-dimensional
tion can include. Features processed by the loop stacking
data into two-dimensional structures has been widely used to method can simultaneously operate on five features in one ker-
leverage the strong representation capabilities of convolutional
nel. Conversely, the direct stacking convolution structure can
neural networks in domains where data lacks inherent spatial
only extract and process information from three adjacent ele-
organization. Prior works in transformed one-dimensional ments. The loop stacking can effectively extract the interre-
lated information, enhancing the field of view without
learning domains have shown that reshaping or projecting
altering the convolution kernel size, thus yielding more valu-
1D vectors into 2D indicators allows CNNs to better capture
local patterns and feature interactions.41,42 When the number able insights and more comprehensively unveiling the interre-
lationships among factors.
of features is large, simple reshaping can create sufficiently rich
2D layouts for convolution. However, in scenarios like our
To extract potential information and interrelations among
SEE task, where the SoS indicator vector contains 12 features,
the two-dimensional features, a SEE model based on the
such reshaping is limited in its ability to provide enough space. ResNet network43 is utilized as the backbone to predict the
Therefore, a stacking-based transformation can be employed
effectiveness of UAVS. ResNet model’s structure is selected
to construct a two-dimensional structure suitable for
and modified for its ability to handle deeper architectures while
convolution. preserving important information through residual connec-
tions, which mitigates the vanishing gradient problem. Its con-
To address this, we propose a loop stacking approach that
volutional layers are capable of extracting both local and
performs cyclic shifts of the original feature vector, generating
a series of rotated variants. These indicators are stacked row- global patterns from the transformed bi-dimensional data,