4 W. QUAN et al.
explored area; such models can offer a potential direction for 3.2. UAVS simulation and SoS indicators
future research.
While current research in Data-driven SEE has largely
The simulation system serves as the medium for assessing the
focused on traditional machine learning approaches, deep
effectiveness of unmanned swarms. To provide a carrier for
learning-based methods, especially CNN-based networks,
the evaluation, a simulation system for UAVS is established
offer significant advantages in extracting complex relationships
for further effectiveness evaluation. It is worth noting that
from SoS indicators. These methods are particularly well-
our Data-driven SEE framework is not limited to this simula-
suited for capturing the emergent behaviors and non-
tion system, but can adapt to different missions. Considering
linearities present in UAVS systems. Thus, the application of that UAVS are widely applied to target detection,3 a typical
CNN to SEE remains a promising area for further exploration.
scenario for collaborative detection and tracking tasks based
Among much of the existing research on Data-driven SEE,
on Refs. 19,24 and 25 is designed and simulated. The designa-
they have not sufficiently considered the challenges related to
tion details of the simulation system are described in Appendix
data collection, particularly the high costs and complexities
A. The mission requires detection drones and communication
of gathering large-scale, high-quality data from simulation sys-
drones to detect and track multiple dynamic targets (ground
tems or the real world.40 Moreover, these approaches often fail
vehicles in this task) in a multi-obstacle urban environment.
to consider the alignment between the trained models and the
The UAVS will search the map for the vehicles and track tar-
actual requirements of the systems.11 In real-world applica-
gets once located. If one target is tracked for a certain period,
tions, ensuring that model predictions align with the specific
the tracking task for that target is considered successful. In
demands of UAVS is critical to achieving accurate and reliable
order to increase the complexity of the task, the target vehicles
effectiveness evaluations.
are considered to cause drones to become disabled during the
To address these gaps, this study will explore methods for
tracking process. Fig. 1 shows some scenarios of the simulated
overcoming the challenges of data collection and propose solu-
missions, including the 3D scenario, 2D scenario, and a local
tions to ensure that the trained models align with real-world
view of a group of UAVS, including 4 detection UAVs and
application requirements. The focus will be on developing a
1 communication UAV is tracking one blue vehicle target. In
deep learning-based SEE framework that not only captures
these scenarios, the UAVS and target vehicles have been
the complex relationships among SoS indicators but also
amplified for better display. The red UAV represents the com-
requires a limited cost to be established.
munication UAV, and the yellow UAV denotes the UAV for
detection. The blue vehicle represents target vehicles tracked
by UAVS.
3. Effectiveness evaluation framework of UAVS
Utilizing the established scenario and simulation system,
the key indicators that influence the effectiveness of UAVS
3.1. SEE problem for UAVS
and the method to evaluate the SoS effectiveness are defined.
As shown in Table 1, UAVS are categorized into communica-
SEE assesses the target’s effectiveness based on predefined SoS
tion UAVs and detection UAVs. Based on their characteris-
indicators, helping to identify gaps and optimize the effective-
tics, key SoS indicators include quantity, maximum speed,
ness under varying conditions. The evaluation of UAVS sys-
acceleration, and detection range (or communication range
tems’ effectiveness is a critical component in the development
for communication UAVS).
of unmanned system configurations. Given its high accuracy
These indicators are chosen because they can be adjusted
and low time cost, Data-driven SEE is particularly well-
before the mission, allowing for better mission adaptation
suited for assessing UAVS. By leveraging historical simulation
and improved performance. Indicators that cannot be modi-
data to construct an evaluation model, Data-driven SEE can
fied during the task are excluded from the evaluation, as they
learn the relationship between swarm SoS indicators and over-
fall outside of control. To enhance the universality and scala-
all SoS effectiveness.
bility of the SEE model, the relevant indicators of targets to be
Mathematically, Data-driven SEE for UAVS can be
tracked, similar to UAVS SoS indicators, are also included in
defined as follows: Based on the task performance data col-
the model’s input. The inclusion of targets’ indicators is cru-
lected from the UAVS simulation system, a simulated data-
cial, as it introduces uncertainty into the mission. This prevents
set O O O O can be established, consisting of
s s1 s2 sn the model from relying on fixed parameters and ensures adapt-
multiple UAVS SoS indicators and corresponding effective-
ability to the dynamic, unpredictable nature of real-world sce-
ness data. The SEE data for UAVS i, denoted as
narios. Therefore, 12 main factors are considered, which can
O D E , consists of D D D D , which rep-
si i i i i1 i2 im significantly influence UAVS’ effectiveness.
resents m SoS indicators, and E , which denotes the simu-
i In terms of the measurement of SoS effectiveness, the task
lated SoS effectiveness. The goal of the Data-driven SEE
completion rate is the primary factor based on the characteris-
for UAVS is to construct an evaluation model capable of
tics of the task. This indicator represents the proportion of tar-
predicting the effectiveness E through the given SoS indica-
i gets detected and tracked within the specified time in the task.
tors D . Thus, the model can be expressed as E f D ,
i i i Assuming that the total number of target vehicles is N and the
t
where f is the prediction function, the core objective of
number of targets detected and tracked by the drone swarm is
the SoS effectiveness model. Once the model is fully trained,
N , the completion rate of the task M is
d c
new UAVS, along with their respective SoS indicators, can
N
be evaluated and analyzed. M t 1
c N
d