20 W. QUAN et al.
Declaration of competing interest val, executing scene state updates, agent actions, and system
capability checks to ensure real-time behavior and task
The authors declare that they have no known competing execution.
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Appendix B. SoS effectiveness optimization model of UAVS
Acknowledgements This section introduces the UAVS SoS effectiveness optimiza-
tion model, further applying the Data-driven SEE framework.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural In terms of the optimization objective, besides SoS effective-
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 62273044 and 62022015); ness, the configuration cost is included in the optimization pro-
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China cess, which is computed as a weighted sum of the UAVS
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars, configuration indicators. It reflects the SoS-level resource
China (No. 62025301); and in part by the National Natural requirement of a deployment plan. In this optimization prob-
Science Foundation of China Basic Science Center Program, lem, the decision variables are the SoS indicators of UAVS.
China (No. 62088101). Some indicators, like the number of drones, are discrete and
usually vary within a certain integer range, while others, like
Appendix A. Simulation system of UAVS maximum speed, are continuous. Thus, the decision variables
are expressed as mixed variables, with discrete indicators rep-
This section provides an overview of the simulation system resenting quantities and sensor range and continuous ones rep-
used to apply and validate the Data-driven model. The UAVS resenting speed and acceleration. Denote z x d u c where
simulation scenario involves a collaborative detection and x d x 1 x 2 x v is the vector of discrete indicators and
tracking mission19,24 described as follows. u c u 1 u 2 u k is the vector of continuous indicators.
In a2 k m 2 km city environment, UAVS is commanded The optimization objectives include maximizing SoS effec-
to detect and track ground vehicles. UAVS equipment includes tiveness and minimizing the configuration cost. The optimiza-
drones for communication and detection. The goal for UAVS tion model is formulated as follows:
is to detect all the ground vehicles within 12 min and maintain max F z E f x x x u u u
1 s 1 2 v 1 2 k
tracking for at least 5 min without losing them. z
We use the agent-based modeling method to build a simu- m z i n F 2 z v i 1 c i x i k j 1 w j u j
lation model of the unmanned swarm system for this scenario. s t xl 6 x 6 xu i 1 2 v B1
In this model, each drone is considered an agent with defined i i i
ul 6 u 6 uu j 1 2 k
motion, detection, and collaboration behaviors. j j j
The drone model is designed for rotary-wing UAV. In 3D x Zv u Rk
d c
space, the drone’s state is represented by a vector
In this model, E represents effectiveness calculated by the
Q P V H , where P x y z is the position vector. s
Data-driven SEE model. c and w are the weights for calculat-
V v v v is the velocity vector, and H h h represents i j
x y z h p ing the configuration cost of UAVS. The second objective is
the horizontal and pitch angles. In the discrete simulation
referred to as ‘‘Configuration cost” in Table 11 and through-
framework, the UAV updates its position based on its current
out the main text. The value constraints on x and u define
velocity vector, which is controlled by speed and direction. The i j
their bounds, where xl and ul are the lower bounds of indica-
UAV has six motion control actions: acceleration, decelera- i j
tion, left turn, right turn, ascent, and descent. These actions tors, and xu i and uu j are the corresponding upper bounds. The
are combined for behaviors such as free exploration, direc- last constraint regulates that variables are classified as discrete
tional tracking, and obstacle avoidance. The artificial potential or continuous. The optimization seeks to maximize SoS effec-
field method is used for obstacle detection and avoidance. For tiveness while minimizing the configuration cost.
detection, we use the truncated exponential decay disk proba-
bility sensing model51 to evaluate the UAV’s detection References
capabilities.
1. Zhang YZ, Ding MY, Yuan Y, et al. Large-scale UAV swarm
Collaboration is a key feature of UAVS. The formation
path planning based on mean-field reinforcement learning. Chin
control and communication models are designed for two types
J Aeronaut 2025;38(9):103484.
of UAVS: communication UAV and detection UAV. The
2. Wang ES, Liu F, Hong C, et al. MADRL-based UAV swarm
swarm is divided into groups, with each group containing a
non-cooperative game under incomplete information. Chin J
specific ratio of the two types of UAV, allowing for dynamic Aeronaut 2024;37(6):293–306.
adjustments during the mission. The leader–follower forma- 3. Chen J, Sun J, Wang G. From unmanned systems to
tion control model governs the group configuration. The com- autonomous intelligent systems. Engineering 2022;12:16–9.
munication network model ensures information exchange 4. Ding JF, Si GY, Ma J, et al. Mission evaluation: expert
between drones within and across groups, enabling target shar- evaluation system for large-scale combat tasks of the weapon
ing, regional coverage, and emergency networking.25 system of systems. Sci China Inf Sci 2017;61(1):012106.
5. Mitchell M. Complexity: A guided tour. 2009,OxfordUniversity
The simulation is implemented using AnyLogic software.
Press; Oxford.
The simulation model for collaborative detection and tracking
6. Tian GD, Hao NN, Zhou MC, et al.Fuzzygreychoquetintegral
is based on intelligent agent models, using high-frequency
for evaluation of multicriteria decision making problems with
clock signals for continuous time simulation. The simulation
interactive and qualitative indices. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern
control module updates the system at each clock signal inter- Syst 2021;51(3):1855–68.