12 W. QUAN et al.
and deep learning. GCN and Transformer are state-of-the-art size are insufficient to utilize the self-attention mechanism
deep learning algorithms in these years. effectively. The traditional methods, such as SE-DEA-SVM
and BPNN-ATT exhibit relatively higher prediction errors.
6.2.2. Model evaluation and comparison analysis SE-DEA-SVM lacks feature extraction, which limits its ability
The proposed ResNet-Skew model is trained sufficiently to to capture complex nonlinear relationships among SoS indica-
ensure convergence. Fig. 7 presents the RMSE convergence tors. BPNN-ATT performs better than SE-DEA-SVM but still
curves on both the training and test datasets during iterative lacks the depth and capacity to extract deep feature represen-
optimization. The model’s error decreases rapidly in the early
tations, leading to suboptimal accuracy. KL-SAE achieves
stages of training. As the number of iterations increases, the
improved performance by using an autoencoder structure for
RMSE curves of both the training and test sets gradually sta- feature compression, but its unsupervised nature may not align
well with the effectiveness prediction task, resulting in moder-
bilize, indicating steady convergence. After sufficient training,
ate errors compared to ResNet-Skew. The proposed deep
the RMSE on the training set drops below 0.02, while the
learning structure of ResNet-Skew allows for better extraction
RMSE on the test set stabilizes around 0.08. The two curves
of deep information from the SoS indicators of UAVS,
exhibit similar convergence trends with no observable signs
enabling more accurate predictions through the integration
of overfitting, suggesting that the model achieves a good bal-
of both potential features and the original features from the
ance between fitting capacity and generalization.
residual modules.
Based on the training and testing sets described earlier, we
train the ResNet-Skew model alongside several comparison
algorithms. The experiment is repeated ten times to statistically
6.2.3. Model structure validation and analysis
assess the performance of each model using the RMSE and Following model validation, this section assesses the effect of
MAE metrics, with the results presented in Table 3. To provide two main modules within the ResNet-Skew algorithm: the
a more robust statistical analysis (mean and standard devia- two-dimensional loop stacking of system indicators and the
tion), the symbols ‘‘+” indicate that the ResNet-Skew model skewed loss function.
is significantly ‘‘superior/equivalent/inferior” to other algo- During the two-dimensional transformation of system indi-
rithms based on the Wilcoxon rank-sum test at the 5 % signif- cators, this algorithm utilizes a method based on loop stacking.
icance level. To validate the effect of 2D transformation and the loop
The results demonstrate that the ResNet-Skew model sig- stacking-based transformation methods, a comparison of dif-
nificantly outperforms the other algorithms across both RMSE ferent data processing methods is conducted. The 1D convolu-
and MAE metrics. The 1D-CNN algorithm performs the tion with the same residual structure is employed to compare
worst, with an RMSE exceeding 0.2, indicating substantial the effect of the 2D transformation. Furthermore, the direct
errors. In contrast, the proposed two-dimensional convolu- stacking-based 2D transformation method described in Sec-
tional structure and following residuals structure of the tion 4.2 and Fig. 3(a) is also included to verify the advantage
ResNet-Skew model, which is designed for the 2D data, cap- of loop stacking in 2D transformation. The results of this com-
tures the interrelationships among the various indicators more parison are presented in Table 4.
effectively than the one-dimensional convolution used by the While three models employ the same residual structure, the
1D-CNN. This deeper, multidimensional feature extraction performance of applying loop stacking and direct stacking-
enhances the model’s performance. Furthermore, GCN and based 2D transformation is superior to direct 1D convolution,
Transformer, which are two advanced deep learning models, which can demonstrate that the 2D transformation can extract
also achieve limited performance. The relatively poor perfor- more complex and higher-level information from the original
mance of GCN is primarily due to the absence of inherent SoS indicators. Furthermore, the evaluation network employ-
graph structure in the SoS indicator data. The 12- ing loop stacking also outperforms the algorithm with direct
dimensional system indicator vector represents parallel fea- stacking modules in terms of both RMSE and MAE metrics.
tures without explicit topological relationships. By intertwining variables across the entire two-dimensional
Similarly, Transformer is designed for long-sequence mod- metric structure, the convolutional module can effectively
eling tasks, where capturing long-range dependencies is essen- extract the correlations between different metrics, thus enhanc-
tial. In our problem, the feature structure and limited dataset ing model performance.
Furthermore, to illustrate the impact of the skewed loss
function on relieving overestimation, this section compares
models using biased loss functions with varying parameters k
with those using Huber loss functions. Initially, to visually
demonstrate the effect of the skewed loss function, we compare
the overestimated bias (predicted values minus actual values)
of some samples trained with the skewed loss function and
the normal Huber loss function, as depicted in Fig. 8.
The red line between the Huber loss point (red point) and
the skewed loss point (green point) represents the situation
where the overestimated bias is alleviated by the skewed loss.
The skewed loss function significantly reduces the overesti-
mated bias for most samples compared to the red point of
the Huber function. However, in some cases, there is a signif-
icant negative bias, where the original small loss is magnified
Fig. 7 RMSE iteration curves of ResNet-Skew.