2 W. QUAN et al.
unmanned swarm systems. As an indispensable link in demon- diction biases must be accounted for in real-world
strating UAVS capabilities, system-of-Systems Effectiveness applications. Secondly, regarding data dependencies, training
Evaluation (SEE) has received increasing attention. Data-driven evaluation models requires a large amount of
The aim of SEE for UAVS is to evaluate (predict) the effec- extensive training data. However, obtaining effectiveness data
tiveness UAVS systems can achieve in specific tasks, which is for UAVS requires running system simulations for annotation,
accomplished by establishing an evaluation framework to which is time-consuming and relatively expensive.12
assess their effectiveness based on SoS indicators before exe- The overall goal of this paper is to develop a Data-driven
cuting tasks. Through providing a comprehensive, precise, framework that addresses the aforementioned challenges of
and real-time evaluation, SEE can provide critical information model-demand alignment and data dependencies. To achieve
and thus guide the decision process in subsequent missions. this goal, this paper proposes a Data-driven SEE framework,
The SEE of UAVS is a complex, multi-dimensional problem including the main evaluation network: a residual-based eval-
due to the UAVS SoS’s nonlinearity, hierarchy, and emergent uation network with skewed loss, and an active learning strat-
properties.5 The vast swarm sizes, intricate interconnections, egy to select high-value samples for annotation and model
and the large number of diverse indicators further complicate training. The main contributions of this paper can be summa-
the SEE. Given these challenges, this paper aims to establish a rized as follows:
holistic evaluation framework to accurately assess the effec-
tiveness of UAVS. (1) A comprehensive Data-driven SEE evaluation frame-
Over the past decades, various SEE methodologies have work is proposed, which integrates a deep learning-
been proposed, which can be categorized into four main based evaluation network: Residual Network with Skew
groups: experience-driven, mathematical analysis-driven, loss (ResNet-Skew) with an efficient active learning-
simulation-driven, and Data-driven SEE. The experience- based sample selection strategy. This framework enables
driven method6 and mathematical analysis-driven approach fast, accurate evaluation of UAVS system effectiveness
aim to establish evaluation models from SoS indicators to with reduced labeling costs, supports system configura-
effectiveness based on expert knowledge and analytical math- tion optimization, and demonstrates strong generaliza-
ematical functions. Due to the complexity and emergence of tion ability through transfer learning across different
UAVS systems, the difficulty of constructing a credible method operational scenarios.
through experts’ subjective experience7 or mathematical mod- (2) A ResNet-Skew evaluation network is designed for fast
els to evaluate effectiveness is gradually increasing. For such and accurate Data-driven evaluation of UAVS. This
complex systems, simulation-based SEE methods are increas- evaluation model integrates the ResNet model to cap-
ingly applied. The operation and interaction of UAVS in ture feature dependencies in SoS indicators processed
actual environments can be simulated, thereby obtaining more by loop stacking methods. A skewed loss function is also
objective and accurate evaluation results.8 However, the acqui- applied to reflect the asymmetric risk preference in
sition of effectiveness for each task requires time-consuming UAVS operations, penalizing overestimation more
simulations and statistics, which makes it difficult to provide heavily to meet mission-critical safety requirements.
rapid results for a specific system. (3) An active learning strategy is proposed to select high-
Utilizing simulated historical or practical data, the Data- value samples for labeling through the swarm simulation
driven approach can establish an intelligent evaluation model system. By combining the cluster-based method and ran-
that deeply reflects the complexity of swarm systems and dom greedy sampling, the algorithm can reduce the
achieves precise evaluation. This method not only avoids required number of labeled samples significantly while
human interference, improving the objectivity and accuracy maintaining evaluation accuracy.
of evaluation results, but also enables optimization of the (4) The proposed framework is extensively validated
parameters, strategies, or structures of the swarm system.9 through comparisons with state-of-the-art baselines,
As an advanced technique within the Data-driven field, deep ablation and utility analysis, as well as generalization
learning-based evaluation10 can learn from extensive historical and sensitivity tests, demonstrating its robustness and
data, continuously improving the model’s generalization abil- practical applicability across various scenarios.
ity, and thus providing high-precision evaluation in situations
with abundant evaluation data. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
The deep learning-driven SEE still faces several challenges reviews the related work on SEE. The framework of the pro-
related to model-demand alignment and data dependencies. posed Data-driven SEE is described in Section 3. Sections 4
First, deep learning struggles to directly align the established and 5 elaborate on the deep learning-based SEE and active
UAVS model with real-world application requirements. On learning strategy of the framework. Section 6 presents the
one hand, the extracted indicator systems typically consist of experiment of the proposed method. Finally, Section 7 con-
one-dimensional, non-sequential features, which are inconsis- cludes this paper.
tent with the typical feature format used in advanced deep
learning. On the other hand, general prediction models rarely
consider the impact of bias,11 which is the discrepancy between 2. Related works
predicted and actual effectiveness values. In application sce-
2.1. SEE me thod
narios, when the model’s predicted effectiveness exceeds the
actual effectiveness, this can lead to an overestimation of the
system’s capabilities. If this configuration is used to perform A variety of approaches have been proposed to solve SEE
a task, the UAVS system might fail because its actual effective- problems. The evaluation process typically begins by defining
ness does not meet expectations. Therefore, the impact of pre- a comprehensive set of SoS indicators, followed by the