       A Review on Current Status and Methodology
      of UAV Swarm Combat Effectiveness Evaluation

          Wenjia Wang, Jialong Zhang, Hanzhang Xue, Li Yu, and Lei Ye(B)

        Test Center, National University of Defense Technology, Xi’an 710102, China
                                  yelei@nudt.edu.cn



       Abstract. This paper systematically summarizes the research development in the
       field of UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation and integrates the develop-
       ment of the evaluation index system and methodology through a multidimen-
       sional categorization framework. First, in terms of the evaluation index system,
       the existing studies are categorized into a three-dimensional evaluation frame-
       work oriented to capability factors, environment factors, and combat missions.
       Second, at the technical level of effectiveness evaluation methodology, existing
       studies are divided into four categories: qualitative analysis based on expert expe-
       rience, modeling methodology based on mathematical analysis, simulation-based
       dynamic deduction technology, and data-driven and artificial intelligence method-
       ology. Finally, this paper analyzes the shortcomings of the current research in
       both evaluation system robustness and dynamic adaptive evaluation, and proposes
       that the future trends are to develop the multi-mission collaborative evaluation
       index system, the dynamic evaluation model, the intelligence-driven evaluation-
       optimization closed-loop mechanism, and other related research. The results
       can provide theoretical support for UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation
       research.

       Keywords: UAV Swarm · Effectiveness Evaluation · Index System · Evaluation
       Methodology



1 Introduction
In recent years, the breakthroughs in artificial intelligence and group intelligence algo-
rithms have pushed the UAV to evolve towards clustering and autonomy, which have
jointly produced the new combat mode of UAV swarm combat [1]. The core concept
of UAV swarm combat refers to a combat system formed by multiple UAVs through
autonomous coordination and intelligent networking, with the support of a networked
information system to achieve a centralized and unified combat capability [2]. UAVs
within a swarm can fly autonomously to the mission area while avoiding collisions with
other units, and can automatically detect threats and locate targets based on artificial
intelligence and image processing technology.
    With the continuous development of the intelligence and control technology of UAV
swarm, it has gradually formed a combat mode based on the theory of OODA (obser-
vation, orientation, decision, action) [3]. In order to measure the UAV swarm in the

© Beijing HIWING Scientific and Technological Information Institute 2026
S. Xie et al. (Eds.): ICAUS 2025, LNEE 1579, pp. 284–292, 2026.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-95-7668-5_27
             A Review on Current Status and Methodology of UAV Swarm Combat            285

combat environment, it is necessary to analyze the combat capability, combat suitabil-
ity, technical performance, and mission completion rate to realize the reliable evaluation
of UAV swarm combat effectiveness. The UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation
based on high-confidence evaluation indexes and models, which can obtain the effective
description of UAV swarm autonomous and cooperative characteristics, and provide a
basis for whether UAV swarm meet the requirements.
     The core steps of the UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation mainly include
the following points. First, the purpose and scope of the evaluation are clarified in
the light of the combat mission. Second, starting from the top-level index (i.e., com-
bat effectiveness), determine the overall framework of the evaluation, and construct a
combat effectiveness evaluation index system. Third, design the evaluation method and
establish the evaluation model. Finally, calculate and analyze the UAV swarm com-
bat effectiveness evaluation and conduct experimental verification and analysis. UAV
swarm combat effectiveness evaluation is characterized by emergence, dynamics, and
a nonlinear coordination mechanism when performing combat missions, which makes
the evaluation difficult in the design of evaluation indexes and high in the requirements
of evaluation models.


2 Research on UAV Swarm Combat Effectiveness Evaluation Index
  System

2.1 The Capability-Based Evaluation Index System

The evaluation index system is the basic framework of UAV swarm combat effective-
ness evaluation, and its scientificity and completeness directly affect the reliability of
the evaluation result. The capability-based UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation
index system, i.e., the basic parameter indexes that enable the swarm to operate safely
and stably, and complete the mission successfully. This type of evaluation index sys-
tem includes the UAV’s survivability, maneuverability, perception, communication, and
combat capability, as well as autonomous decision-making capability, cooperative inter-
action capability, and continuous learning capability, etc., which are inherent, intrinsic,
and controllable elements of the swarm. A number of scholars have already researched
this problem [4–9].
    It can be concluded from the analysis of existing studies that the combat capability
of UAV swarm is based on their individual performance and the overall performance of
the swarm, and current research has formed a consensus on the core capability index,
focusing on the dimensions of survivability, cooperative interaction, and autonomous
decision-making, and has verified the basic efficacy through simulation and small-scale
tests. However, most of the existing researches consider the inherent attributes of UAV
swarm, focusing on the construction of UAV swarm equipment performance index sys-
tem, and less consideration is given to the degree of influence of the UAV swarm under the
complex combat environment or the effect of the capability in the complex confrontation
environment.
286       W. Wang et al.

2.2 The Environment-Based Evaluation Index System
Environmental factors are externally imposed conditions and constraints, such as terrain,
weather, electromagnetic interference, and other uncontrollable factors. UAV swarm will
be affected by the surrounding environmental factors when it carries out the mission,
and the external conditions in which the swarm is located have a direct impact on the
UAV swarm combat effectiveness. Authors in [10–14] have conducted in-depth studies
on such problems.
    By analyzing the existing research, it can be concluded that the current research is
fruitful at the level of environment modeling and intelligent algorithms. The construction
of the evaluation index system oriented to environmental factors takes into account the
environmental adaptability and appropriateness of use of the UAV swarm, which can
measure the combat capability of the UAV swarm in a more specific way. However, the
existing research in dynamic confrontation adaptability, large-scale swarm robustness,
and other aspects of the research is not perfect; the construction of the evaluation index
system should be combined with combat simulation and practical exercises.

2.3 The Combat Mission-Based Evaluation Index System
Combat missions are the demands of the application scenarios, involving specific combat
objectives, mission complexity, threat level, and other variables. The construction of the
combat mission-based evaluation index system can reflect the utilization of UAV swarm
combat capability in various mission segments and combat phases in the context of
combat missions. This type of problem has been studied in the literature [15–20].
    By summarizing the relevant research, it can be seen that the evaluation index system
for combat missions has made significant research achievements in terms of hierarchical
structure and specialized index. The relevant research mainly focuses on evaluating the
performance of UAV swarm with regard to the mission requirements. However, when
analyzing the combat effectiveness, the reliability of UAV swarm in different combat
environments and the cooperation with combat commanders should also be taken into
account to build a more perfect evaluation index system.

3 Development of UAV Swarm Combat Effectiveness Evaluation
  Methodology
3.1 Experience-Based Evaluation Methodology
Experience-based evaluation methodology mainly refers to methods based on human
subjective experience or specialized knowledge. The UAV swarm combat effectiveness
evaluation is conducted through the subjective experience of domain experts to judge
the impact of each evaluation index, combined with qualitative analysis and quantitative
calculation.
(1) The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) method is to decompose complex problems
    into a hierarchical structure, through subjective experience to determine the weight
    of the indexes, and calculate the total score. In UAV swarm combat effectiveness
    evaluation, AHP can effectively integrate various types of indexes and establish a
    hierarchical evaluation system to provide evaluation results [21–23].
             A Review on Current Status and Methodology of UAV Swarm Combat            287

(2) The fuzzy comprehensive evaluation method uses the fuzzy relationship synthesis
    theory to deal with uncertainty and ambiguity in evaluation. By synthesizing the
    fuzzy evaluation values and weights of the effectiveness evaluation indexes, the
    qualitative evaluation is transformed into the quantitative evaluation [24–26].
    The advantage of the experience-based evaluation method is that it can effectively
integrate quantitative and qualitative indexes, structurally deal with the complex rela-
tionships between indexes, be simple to calculate, and reflect the preferences of decision
makers. However, the determination of weights is highly subjective, and it is difficult to
ensure that each index can be quantified through experimentation.

3.2 Mathematical-Based Evaluation Methodology
The mathematical modeling-based evaluation method is to take the mathematical model
as the basis, according to the meaning of the evaluation indexes and the relation-
ship between them, analyze the internal connection of each index, and establish the
mathematical evaluation model.
(1) The ADC method uses three elements, A(availability), D(dependability) and
    C(capability), to evaluate the comprehensive indexes: E = ADC. The ADC method
    analyzes the problem logically, and some scholars have evaluated the UAV swarm
    combat effectiveness using this method [27, 28].
(2) The system effectiveness analysis method defines the swarm capability and mission
    requirement in the combat environment, respectively, and calculates effectiveness
    by comparing the intersection set of the two. This method focuses on the matching
    degree between the capability and requirement, and is suitable for evaluating whether
    or not a UAV swarm can satisfy a particular mission [29, 30].
(3) The data envelopment analysis method is a linear programming method for evaluat-
    ing the relative effectiveness of units in a complex system. This method can be used
    to compare the combat effectiveness of different UAV swarms and different combat
    plans, and provide specific directions for improvement [31, 32].
    The advantages of mathematical modeling-based evaluation methods include effi-
cient calculation, interpretable results, and the ability to compare multiple combat plans.
However, such a method is limited to modeling complex systems, and it is difficult to
comprehensively show the performance of the UAV swarm.

3.3 Simulation-Based Evaluation Methodology
The simulation-based evaluation method is to build a simulation model that covers the
UAV swarm, combat environment, and mission process according to the combat mission,
and then run a large number of simulation experiments and output the statistical results
to evaluate the combat effectiveness.
(1) The Monte Carlo method simulates the random phenomena that may occur in
    real combat through multiple random sampling, and then summarizes the simu-
    lation experimental data obtained, analyzes the distributions of mean, variance, and
    confidence intervals to obtain the evaluation result of UAV swarm [33, 34].
288        W. Wang et al.

(2) The system dynamics method describes the interactions of elements through causal
    analysis. In UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation, this method effectively
    solves the complexity and uncertainty problems by quantifying the dynamic coupling
    relationship among capability, environment, and mission [19, 35].
(3) The simulation verification method based on the architecture framework mainly
    adopts DoDAF/UAF and other frameworks to describe the structure, behavior, and
    interaction of the combat system. Through simulation and data analysis, it can effec-
    tively solve the problem of UAV swarm combat effectiveness optimization [36,
    37].
    The advantage of the simulation-based evaluation method is that it can deal with
highly complex, dynamic, and nonlinear systems by establishing a simulation model that
is adapted to actual combat mission and combat environment. The shortcoming is that
the development of the model requires a large amount of data and a high computational
overhead.


3.4 Data-Driven and Artificial Intelligence-Based Evaluation Methodology
Data-driven and artificial intelligence evaluation methods derived from big data and
artificial intelligence technology refer to the application of a large amount of data to train
models and establish relationships from input to output, which applies to performance
prediction and effectiveness evaluation.
(1) The neural network method is a machine learning algorithm that is trained to adap-
    tively deal with complex nonlinear relationships. When using this method to evaluate
    UAV swarm combat effectiveness, first, train the optimal neural network evaluation
    model through a large amount of data, and then output the evaluation result by taking
    the obtained index values as inputs [38, 39].
(2) The support vector machine method is to transfer problems from the input space to a
    high-dimensional space through a kernel function nonlinear mapping. This method
    can accurately describe the interactions between UAV swarm combat effectiveness
    indexes and is suitable for solving prediction problems [40, 41].
(3) The Bayesian network method is an uncertainty inference method based on a prob-
    abilistic graphical model. The UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation can use
    directed acyclic graphs to structurally characterize the conditional dependencies
    between elements within the swarm and quantify the uncertainty transfer mecha-
    nism based on conditional probability tables. In addition, this method can analyze
    the influence of each index on the overall effectiveness through the inference [16,
    42].
    Data-driven and artificial intelligence evaluation methods have strong prediction and
evaluation capability, which are of great value to the UAV swarm combat effectiveness
evaluation. Noting that this type of method requires a large amount of high-quality
training data to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the evaluation results.
             A Review on Current Status and Methodology of UAV Swarm Combat               289

4 Existing Research Gaps and Future Research Perspectives

4.1 Gaps in Existing Research
Although UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation has made great progress, there
are still significant limitations in terms of the improvement of the index system, the
innovation of the modeling technology, and the interpretability of the evaluation results,
which constrain the application in real-world combat decision-making.
(1) The effectiveness evaluation lacks standardization and robustness. The current eval-
    uation has not yet formed a unified structure covering “capability-environment-
    mission”, and the construction of the existing index system is mostly based on tradi-
    tional combat scenarios, making it difficult to support the new combat missions. In
    addition, the existing evaluation mostly relies on ideal data sources, and it is difficult
    to deal with the problem of key indexes being unavailable due to interference in
    a combat environment. A scientifically valid mechanism for alternative indexes is
    lacking, and the robustness of the evaluation is insufficient. The interpretability of
    the results of existing effectiveness evaluation also needs to be improved.
(2) The existing UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation has limitations in prac-
    tical applications. In terms of dynamic adaptability, the traditional static model is
    difficult to portray the time-varying combat environment and swarm state evolution.
    In terms of solving efficiency, most of the methods find it difficult to balance the
    accuracy and solving scale, and solution efficiency tends to decay exponentially
    with increasing size. In terms of uncertainty quantification, probabilistic methods
    are overly dependent on a priori assumptions and ignore cognitive uncertainty. In
    terms of method synergy, various evaluation methods can only achieve better results
    in specific scenarios, and hybrid evaluation methods are less frequently applied.

4.2 Prospects for Future Research

In view of the current study of UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation and the
deficiencies that exist, combined with the future combat missions and the development
of intelligent technology, this problem can be researched in the future from the following
aspects.
(1) Establish a multi-mission coordinated evaluation index system. In the future, UAV
    swarm needs to complete many different combat missions, therefore, it is necessary
    to consider diversified mission requirements when constructing the UAV swarm
    combat effectiveness evaluation index system, realize the expansion from single-
    mission to multi-mission cooperation, and establish an expandable effectiveness
    evaluation index system that applies to many different combat missions.
(2) Dynamic effectiveness evaluation research. The existing UAV swarm combat effec-
    tiveness evaluation is mainly based on static evaluation, in the future, when con-
    structing the effectiveness evaluation, it should focus on the real-time and dynamic
    characteristics of UAV swarm under the real-word combat environment, and com-
    bine the real-time missions, combat objects, etc., to establish a dynamic model and
    realize the dynamic evaluation of UAV swarm combat effectiveness.
290        W. Wang et al.

(3) Intelligence-driven evaluation-optimization closed-loop research. By taking the
    results of the effectiveness evaluation as the feedback information, an evaluation-
    optimization closed-loop feedback mechanism can be constructed. Combined with
    intelligent algorithms, the iteration of real-time effectiveness evaluation and dynamic
    decision-making will be carried out to achieve dynamic optimization of effective-
    ness, promote the UAV swarm combat in the direction of autonomous evolution, and
    provide technical support for future unmanned combat.

5 Conclusion

This paper focuses on the core issues of UAV swarm combat effectiveness evaluation,
through systematically analyzing the construction of the evaluation index system and the
technical development of the evaluation method, reviewing and classifying the existing
research, and analyzing the gaps of current research and the development trend in the
future. The research results can provide technical reference for relevant personnel to
carry out the unmanned combat effectiveness evaluation.
Funding Resources This work was supported in part by the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation under Grant GZC20242273 and 2025 M774443, and the Youth Foundation
of the National University of Defense Technology under Grant ZK23–59.


References
 1. Alqudsi, Y., Makaraci, M.: UAV swarms: research, challenges, and future directions[J]. J.
    Eng. Appl. Sci. 72(1), 12 (2025)
 2. Niu, Y., Xiao, X., Ke, G.: Operation concept and key techniques of unmanned aerial vehicle
    swarms[J]. Natl. Def. Sci. Technol. 34(05), 37–43 (2013)
 3. Zhao, R., Yu, H., You, Y., et al.: Review on current status and technology method of unmanned
    swarm test evaluation[J]. Syst. Eng. Electr. 46(02), 570–585 (2024)
 4. Qi, Z., Zhang, H., Yi, S., et al.: Research on the index system of intelligent UAV group combat
    effectiveness evaluation[J]. Ship Electr. Eng. 41(09), 1–5 (2021)
 5. Huang, J., Zhou, D.: Design and analysis of an evaluation index system for UAV cooperative
    combat effectiveness[J]. J. Xi’an Technol. Univ. 40(01), 38–44 (2020)
 6. Wang, Y., Shi, X., Li, C.: Research on evaluation of UAV cooperative combat effectiveness
    based on DoDAF[J]. J. Air Force Eng. Univ. Nat. Sci. Ed. 21(06), 66–72 (2020)
 7. Wu, J., Wang, Q.: Operational effectiveness evaluation for formation attacking ground
    targets[J]. Comp. Syst. Appl. 21(03), 83–86 (2012)
 8. Wang, Y., Wen, J., Yuan, T., et al.: Main performance index of UAV aggregation problem[J].
    Ordn. Ind. Autom. 39(10), 71–75 (2020)
 9. Amorim, J., Alves, V., de Freitas, E.: Assessing a swarm-GAP based solution for the task
    allocation problem in dynamic scenarios[J]. Expert Syst. Appl. 152, 113437 (2020)
10. Gao, Y., Li, D., Liu, X.: UAV swarm cooperative situation perception consensus evaluation
    [J]. Acta Electron. Sin. 47(01), 190–196 (2019)
11. Tang, S., Zhou, Z., Jiang, J., et al.: Consensus evaluation of UAV swarm cooperative situation
    awareness considering perturbation [J]. ACTA Aeronautica et Astronautica Sinica. 41(S2),
    13–23 (2020)
              A Review on Current Status and Methodology of UAV Swarm Combat                  291

12. Gao, Y., Li, D.: UAV swarm cooperative situation perception consensus evaluation method
    based on three-parameter interval number and heronian mean operator[J]. IEEE Access. 6,
    73328–73340 (2018)
13. Chen, S., Zhang, H.: Combat capability evaluation of heterogeneous UAV swarm based on
    combat network model[J]. Mil. Oper. Res. Syst. Eng. 33(01), 38–43 (2019)
14. Gao, Y., Li, D.: Consensus evaluation method of multi-ground-target threat for unmanned
    aerial vehicle swarm based on heterogeneous group decision making[J]. Comp. Electr. Eng.
    74, 223–232 (2019)
15. Xu, D., Zhou, C., Cao, Z., et al.: Combat effectiveness evaluation of unmanned ground combat
    equipment based on matter element extension method [J]. J. Gun Launch Control. 43(05),
    29–34 (2022)
16. Wang, J.J., Ma, J., Hou, J., et al.: Operational effectiveness evaluation of UAV swarm based
    on Bayesian networks. J. Phys: Conf. Series. IOP Publishing. 2282(1), 012001 (2022)
17. Li, K., Huang, Q.: Effectiveness analysis of cooperative engagement for UAV swarm. In:
    International Conference on Defence Technology, pp. 1009–1014. The Academy of Military
    Science, Beijing (2018)
18. Li, K., Huang, Q.: Effectiveness analysis on self-operational UCAVs[J]. Fire Control
    Command Control. 44(09), 92–97 (2019)
19. Jia, N., Yang, Z., Yang, K.: Operational effectiveness evaluation of the swarming UAVs combat
    system based on a system dynamics model[J]. IEEE Access. 7, 25209–25224 (2019)
20. Zhang, X., Luo, P., Hu, X.: Defense success rate evaluation for UAV swarm defense system.
    In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Systems, Metaheuristics &
    Swarm Intelligence, pp. 127–132 (2018)
21. Hu, J., Chen, H., Liu, L., et al.: Research on operational effectiveness evaluation of UAV
    swarm [J]. Fire Control Command Control. 47(04), 164–168 (2022)
22. Wang, B., Zhao, J., Chen, B., et al.: Quantitative research on UAV combat capability based
    on improved AHP [J]. Fire Control Command Control. 46(06), 115–120 (2021)
23. Han, Y., Li, Y.: Evaluation of unmanned aerial vehicle swarm combat effectiveness based on
    improved analytic hierarchy process[J]. Ship. Electron. Eng. 44(07), 123–127+137 (2024)
24. Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, L., et al.: Task decision-making for UAV swarms based on
    robustness evaluation. In: 2019 IEEE 19th International Conference on Software Quality,
    Reliability and Security Companion, pp. 242–248. IEEE (2019)
25. Han, Y., Fang, D., Zhang, H., et al.: Evaluation of attack capability of UAV intelligent swarm
    based on AHP fuzzy evaluation. J. Phys: Conf Series. IOP Publishing. 1651(1), 012012 (2020)
26. Liu, T., Yu, N., Wang, F., et al.: Effectiveness evaluation of unmanned cluster system based
    on fuzzy comprehensive evaluation[J]. Command Informat. Syst. Technol. 14(04), 20–25+44
    (2023)
27. Huang, G., Wang, M.: Effectiveness evaluation of multi-fighter cooperated combat based on
    ADC model[J]. Fire Control Command Control. 38(10), 126–129 (2013)
28. Zhou, Q., Wu, H.: Research on performance evaluation of UAV swarm based on ADC-AHP.
    In: Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Systems and
    Network Security, vol. 2023, pp. 426–430
29. He, X., Huang, F., Zhu, J., et al.: Reconnaissance effectiveness evaluation of artillery UAV
    based on SEA[J]. Ship Electr. Eng. 36(12), 161–164 (2016)
30. Cheng, Y., Wang, P., Wang, X.: The effectiveness analysis of the artillery UAV system based
    on SEA[J]. Fire Control Command Control. 34(07), 126–128 (2009)
31. Chen, L., Shen, Y., Ye, L.: Formation efficiency evaluating for tactical UAV system based on
    benchmarking management and DEA methods[J]. Comp. Digital Eng. 44(11), 2184–2190
    (2016)
292        W. Wang et al.

32. Cui, D., Li, H., Lu, M., et al.: Island transport efficiency evaluation method of civilian UAV
    based on super-efficiency parallel network data envelopment analysis[J]. Chin. Med. Equip.
    J. 44(01), 35–41 (2023)
33. Wang, D., Guo, L., Sun, Z., et al.: The vulnerability analysis of UAVs under fragment strikes
    based on Monte Carlo method[J]. J. Proj. Rocket. Missiles Guid. 44(06), 28–36 (2024)
34. Tong, L., Gan, X., Zhang, H., et al.: Risk assessment of UAV collision considering multiple
    factors[J]. J. Ordn. Equip. Eng. 44(04), 282–289 (2023)
35. Zhao, B., Wang, F., Ma, H., et al.: Evaluation of air combat effectiveness based on system
    dynamics[J]. J. Jilin Univ. (Inf. Sci. Ed.). 43(02), 327–337 (2025)
36. Zhao, T., Gao, J., Huang, J.: Modelling and simulation of unmanned landing combat
    architecture based on DoDAF[J]. Comp. Simul. 40(12), 46–54 (2023)
37. Cui, R., Sun, J., Yang, K., et al.: Construction method of equipment operational test indicator
    system based on UAF[J]. Syst. Eng. Electr. 47(05), 1536–1550 (2025)
38. Wang, X., Huang, P., Tang, B.: Operational effectiveness evaluation of unmanned air defense
    equipment based on GA-BP neural network[J]. Unmanned Syst. Technol. 5(03), 106–113
    (2022)
39. Wan, Z., Hu, J., Li, J., et al.: Effectiveness evaluation of land-based intelligent unmanned
    combat systems based on graph convolutional networks[J]. ACTA Armamentarii. 45(S1),
    271–277 (2024)
40. Gan, X., Wang, Y., Wu, Y., et al.: Multi kernel SVM evaluation of UAV air ground com-
    bat effectiveness based on AFSA. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Advances in
    Electrical Engineering and Computer Applications, pp. 449–454. IEEE (2022)
41. Li, X., Ma, X.: Operational effectiveness evaluation of electronic warfare UAV based on
    chaotic particle swarm optimization and support vector machine[J]. Math. Pract. Theory.
    53(02), 152–158 (2023)
42. Chen, H.: Research on Combat Effectiveness Evaluation Method of Formation Based on
    Bayesian Network[D]. Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (2020)
